 EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
HEALTH AND CONSUMERS DIRECTORATE-GENERAL 
 
Public Health and Risk Assessment 
Pharmaceuticals  
 
Brussels,  
SANCO/C8/AM/sl/ares(2010)1064599  
 
 
EudraLex 
The Rules Governing Medicinal Pr oducts in the European Union 
 
Volume 4 
Good Manufacturing Practice 
Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use 
 
Annex 11: Computerised Systems  
 
 
 
Legal basis for publishing the detailed guidelines:  Article 47 of Directive 2001/83/EC on 
the Community code relating to medicinal product s for human use and Article 51 of Directive 
2001/82/EC on the Community code relating to ve terinary medicinal products. This document 
provides guidance for the interpretation of  the principles and guidelines of good 
manufacturing practice (GMP) fo r medicinal products as laid down in Directive 2003/94/EC 
for medicinal products for human use and Directive 91/412/EEC for veterinary use. 
  Status of the document : revision 1 
 
Reasons for changes : the Annex has been revised in re sponse to the increased use of 
computerised systems and the increased comp lexity of these syst ems. Consequential 
amendments are also proposed for Chapter 4 of the GMP Guide.   Deadline for coming into operation : 30 June 2011 
       
 
       
---PAGE BREAK---
Commission Européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, 
B-1049 Brussel - Belgium 
Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11 
 
Principle  
This annex applies to all forms of computeris ed systems used as part of a GMP regulated 
activities. A computerised system is a set of software and hardware components which 
together fulfill certain functionalities.   The application should be validated; IT infrastructure shou ld be qualified.  
 
Where a computerised system replaces a manu al operation, there should be no resultant 
decrease in product quality, process control or qu ality assurance. There should be no increase 
in the overall risk of the process.   
General  
1.  Risk Management   
Risk management should be applied throughout the lifecycle of the computerised system 
taking into account patient safet y, data integrity a nd product quality. As part of a risk 
management system, decisions on the extent of validation and da ta integrity co ntrols should 
be based on a justified and documented risk assessment of the computerised system.  
 
2.  Personnel   
There should be close cooperation between al l relevant personnel such as Process Owner, 
System Owner, Qualified Persons and IT . All personnel should have appropriate 
qualifications, level of access and defined responsi bilities to carry out their assigned duties.  
 
3.  Suppliers and Service Providers   
3.1  When third parties (e.g. suppliers, service pr oviders) are used e.g. to provide, install, 
configure, integrate, validate, maintain (e .g. via remote access), modify or retain a 
computerised system or related service or for data processing, formal agreements must exist 
between the manufacturer and any third partie s, and these agreements should include clear 
statements of the responsibilit ies of the third party. IT-dep artments should be considered 
analogous.   
3.2  The competence and reliability of a supp lier are key factors wh en selecting a product 
or service provider. The need for an audit should be based on a risk assessment.  
 3.3  Documentation supplied with  commercial off-the-shelf pr oducts should be reviewed 
by regulated users to check that user requirements are fulfilled.  
 
3.4      Quality system and audit information re lating to suppliers or developers of software 
and implemented systems should be made available to inspectors on request. 
 
Project Phase  
4.  Validation  
4.1  The validation documentation and reports s hould cover the relevant steps of the life 
cycle. Manufacturers should be ab le to justify their standards,  protocols, acceptance criteria, 
procedures and records based on their risk assessment. 
  
---PAGE BREAK---
4.2  Validation documentation should include ch ange control records (if applicable) and 
reports on any deviations observed during the validation process.  
 
4.3  An up to date listing of all relevant sy stems and their GMP functionality (inventory) 
should be available.  
 
For critical systems an up to date system description detailing th e physical and logical 
arrangements, data flows and in terfaces with other systems or processes, any hardware and 
software pre-requisites, and security  measures should be available.  
 
4.4  User Requirements Specifications should describe the required functions of the 
computerised system and be based on documen ted risk assessment and GMP impact. User 
requirements should be traceable throughout the life-cycle.  4.5  The regulated user should take all reasonable steps, to ensure that the system has been developed in accordance with an appropriate quality management system. The supplier should be assessed appropriately.  
 
4.6  For the validation of bespoke or customis ed computerised systems there should be a 
process in place that ensures the formal assessm ent and reporting of quality and performance 
measures for all the life-cyc le stages of the system.  
 
4.7  Evidence of appropriate test methods a nd test scenarios should be demonstrated. 
Particularly, system (process) parameter limits, data limits and error handling should be considered. Automated testing tools and test  environments should have documented 
assessments for their adequacy.   
4.8 If data are transferred to another data fo rmat or system, validation should include checks 
that data are not altered in value and/or  meaning during this migration process. 
 
Operational Phase  
5.  Data   
Computerised systems exchanging data elec tronically with other systems should include 
appropriate built-in checks for the correct and secu re entry and processing of data, in order to 
minimize the risks.  
 
6.  Accuracy Checks   
For critical data entered manually, there should be an additional check on the accuracy of the 
data. This check may be done by a second operator or by validated electronic means. The criticality and the potential consequences of erroneous or incorrectly entered data to a system 
should be covered by risk management.  
 
7.  Data Storage   
7.1  Data should be secured by both physical a nd electronic means against damage. Stored 
data should be checked for accessibility, read ability and accuracy. Acce ss to data should be 
ensured throughout the retention period. 
  7.2  Regular back-ups of all relevant data should be done. Integrity and accuracy of back-up data and the ability to rest ore the data should be checked during validation and monitored 
periodically.  
 
---PAGE BREAK---
8.  Printouts   
8.1  It should be possible to ob tain clear printed copies of electronically stored data.  
8.2  For records supporting batch release it s hould be possible to generate printouts 
indicating if any of the data has be en changed since the original entry. 
  9.  Audit Trails   
Consideration should be given, based on a risk  assessment, to building into the system 
the creation of a record of all GMP-relevant changes and de letions (a system generated "audit 
trail"). For change or deletion of GMP-relevant  data the reason should be documented. Audit 
trails need to be available and convertible to a generally intelligible form and regularly 
reviewed.  
 
10.  Change and Configuration Management   
Any changes to a computerised system includi ng system configurations should only be made 
in a controlled manner in accordance with a defined procedure.  
 
11.  Periodic evaluation   
Computerised systems should be periodically evalua ted to confirm that they remain in a valid 
state and are compliant with GMP. Such evalua tions should include, where appropriate, the 
current range of functionalit y, deviation records, incident s, problems, upgrade history, 
performance, reliability, security  and validation st atus reports. 
 
12.  Security   
12.1  Physical and/or logical controls should be  in place to restrict access to computerised 
system to authorised persons. Suitable met hods of preventing unauthorised entry to the 
system may include the use of keys, pass card s, personal codes with passwords, biometrics, 
restricted access to computer equipment and data storage areas.   
12.2  The extent of security controls depends on the criticality of the computerised system.  
 12.3  Creation, change, and cancellation of access authorisations should be recorded.   12.4  Management systems for data and for doc uments should be designed to record the 
identity of operators entering, changing, confirmi ng or deleting data including date and time.  
 13.  Incident Management   
All incidents, not only system failures and da ta errors, should be reported and assessed. 
The root cause of a critical in cident should be identified and should form the basis of 
corrective and preventive actions.  
 14.  Electronic Signature   
Electronic records may be signed electronically . Electronic signatures are expected to:  
a. have the same impact as hand-written  signatures within the boundaries of the 
company,  
b. be permanently linked to their respective record,  
c. include the time and date that they were applied.  
 
---PAGE BREAK---
15.  Batch release   
When a computerised system is used for record ing certification and batch release, the system 
should allow only Qualified Persons to certify the release of the batches and it should clearly 
identify and record the person releasing or certi fying the batches. This should be performed 
using an electronic signature.  
 
16.  Business Continuity   
For the availability of computerised systems supporting critical proces ses, provisions should 
be made to ensure continuity of support fo r those processes in th e event of a system 
breakdown (e.g. a manual or alternative system).  The time required to bring the alternative 
arrangements into use should be based on risk an d appropriate for a particular system and the 
business process it supports. These arrangements s hould be adequately documented and tested.  
 
17.  Archiving  
Data may be archived. This data should be ch ecked for accessibility, readability and integrity. 
If relevant changes are to be made to the sy stem (e.g. computer equipment or programs), then 
the ability to retrieve the data  should be ensured and tested. 
 
Glossary  
Application : Software installed on a defined pl atform/hardware providing specific 
functionality  
Bespoke/Customized computerised system: A computerised system individually designed 
to suit a specific business process  
Commercial of the shelf software: Software commercially available, whose fitness for use is 
demonstrated by a broad spectrum of users.   
IT Infrastructure: The hardware and software such as networking software and operation 
systems, which makes it possible fo r the application to function.  
Life cycle: All phases in the life of the system from initial requirements until retirement 
including design, specificati on, programming, testing, installation, operation, and 
maintenance.  
Process owner : The person responsible for the business process.  
System owner : The person responsible for the availability, and maintenance of a 
computerised system and for the security of the data residing on that system.  
Third Party : Parties not directly managed by the hol der of the manufacturing and/or import 
authorisation.  
---PAGE BREAK---
